
Imposter syndrome. I don't think this concept existed back when I first felt it. 

I was a young Airman in Saudi Arabia and life was an adventure. As a radio technician, I would carry an M-16 but would only expect to use it in an extremely rare defensive situation. I was a tech nerd, not a combat soldier. 

We were among the first to arrive at Dharan. When the Load Master told us to prepare for landing, our commander huddled everyone together in the bay of our C-141. We all squeezed together to hear him over the drone of the engines. He told us to very carefully check our weapons to ensure they were "clear" and then load a full magazine of live ammunition, but DO NOT chamber a round. That was the first time I had ever heard that direction outside of a firing range and it felt strange. He said we didn't know for sure what the situation would be on the ground. Things were moving very quickly when we boarded back home at Robbins Air Force Base in Georgia, and when we were updated as we refuled at Lajes Field in the Azores. Dharan is about 200 miles south of the Kuwait border so it was entirely possible for Hussein to have pushed right on through during our 20+ hour flight.

I only experienced a few moments like this in my military career: that kind of peaceful feeling as your mind just kind of wanders and any stress just falls away. In this case it was loading that live ammo and then strapping-in and quietly waiting for what came next. We landed without incident, but I will always remember that feeling of heading into the unknown and trusting that everything would work itself out.

That was early August, 1990. By November there was talk about starting a rotation where folks who had been there since the beginning would be sent home for a couple weeks and then brought back "in theater." They asked for volunteers and some of my colleagues refused outright. Knowing that they *had* to send a certain number of people back, I said I'd go if there were any slots left after any people who were married or had children took a slot. That decision changed my life.

Shortly after I returned to Georgia, the rotation policy was recinded. Somebody decided it was too much work to manage a rotation program when all our focus was on getting ready for a major conflict. Makes sense, but now I was stuck. I had to watch the war kick off on TV, knowing all my friends were over there having SCUD's rain down on them. 

I felt so guilty.

I thought I had done the right thing: tried to get my rotation over with early so others could do theirs and be home for the holidays and I could be back out there refreshed and ready. I had given others with dependents a shot at going first. I had no idea that the winds would shift and I'd be stuck.

When the war was "over" and my friends came home, it was tangible that things were different. There were the ones who were there and the ones who were not. "The Replacements" episode of Band of Brothers captures this perfectly. Nobody ever said anything, but that guilt I felt on the first night of the war has never left me to this day.

------------------

Five years later I spent a few months in Kuwait as we enforced the "No Fly Zone." This time I was on a commercial airliner, but there was a bit of -deja vu- as the pilot told us to lower our window screens and extinguish all lights as we started our descent. Things had calmed down significantly by then, but there was no reason to tempt fate.

It was bizarre to stand inside an aircraft bunker and look up at the sky through a hole in the ceiling punched dead-center. All the rebar, like strands of spaghetti, frozen in place as it was on the day our precision guided munitions "took out" the bunker.

There was a massive, Georgia-style rain storm on Christmas morning and water got inside all our short-range radio feedhorns, knocking out phones all over the base. In probably my proudest moment, over and over again all day I drove from one bulding or bunker to another, climbed onto the roof, dried out the feedhorns, recalibrated the radios, and then on to the next. They said I "saved Christmas" as not only were those radios critical to command and control, but also for morale calls back home. By evening, everyone who wanted to make a morale call had done so and despite a lot of frustration (and mud), the day was saved.

At that time in 1995, things were still fairly "wild west." We could go to Kuwait City or Salmiya every once in a while and buy goodies or have a nice meal. Who knew there was a Fudruckers in Kuwait City! (When I was back again five years later it was a different story.)

One day our Lieutenant setup a tour to Bayt al-Qurain museum in Kuwait City. I really had no idea what to expect, but it was something to do. It turned out this museum had been hastily setup in the last year or so and included displays, testimonials, and photos of every Kuwaiti who was missing as a result of the Iraqi invasion. It was really quite moving. 

After a while, Mr. Saad Hamdan Sharar al-Khatlan arrived and we were served tea as we gathered around to hear his presentation. He was middle-aged, wearing a traditional dishdasha, moved regally, and spoke fairly good English. He said that he had been a member of the resistance against the Iraqis. It was now his task for the rest of his life to tell anyone who will listen of his experiences, partly to honor those who were lost or missing, but also for his own healing.

He described his role as a car bomb driver. Others would make the bombs, place them in the cars, pick the targets, but his role was just to drop the car, set the timer and walk away. The less he knew the better. He was eventually caught and brutally tortured. He mentioned the terrible things they did to his family in trying to get him to talk. He passed binders around the room that contained photos of bodies, living and dead in all manner of indescribable conditions. I had never seen anything like it and was disgusted, but I forced myself to look at the images as I felt it was important to honor those people. At the time there were hundreds of people still missing and I'm sure possibly some were found and reunited with their families, but the museum was a place to catalog and honor the memory of all of them.

It was all so heavy. As he finished his presentation he made a joke and lightened things up a bit, but then he asked how many of us were in the war. I was surprised that only a few hands went up. Five years later it made sense that many people had enlisted in the years since.

He said something like, "We are so grateful for everything the Coalition Forces did to liberate us. But even today, we are so grateful that you are still here because if you were not, I have no doubt that the Iraqis would return."

Then he said something that I will never forget. Through tears, he said: "Because you are here, I can sleep at night. Because you are here, I know that my wife and my children will be safe tonight, and that means everything to me. Thank you. Thank you." 

--------

imposter syndrome



https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2015/08/iraq-kuwait-war-trauma-open-wound-150804064534946.html

